---
layout:   post
title:    "Awesome JavaScript snippets"
date:     2015-10-06 11:51:00
author:   "Jan Jongboom"
tags:     javascript
comments: false
---

I have been writing mostly C and C++ in the last months, hacking away on [LoRa]({{ site.baseurl }}/iot/2015/08/04/smart-meetingroom.html) and [drones](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2015/08/flying-a-drone-in-your-browser-with-webbluetooth/), but I had the pleasure of doing a week of JavaScript again, and I was reminded how much I love this weird, quirk and beautiful language. So today a write-up of some very useful patterns that show the power of JS.

* [One-line async queue](/2015/10/06/js-tricks.html#one-line-async-queue)
* [One-line event emitter](/2015/10/06/js-tricks.html#one-line-event-emitter)
* [Function logger](/2015/10/06/js-tricks.html#function-logger)
* [Promisify'ing functions](/2015/10/06/js-tricks.html#promisifying-functions)
* [Using .forEach(), .sort() on NodeList's](/2015/10/06/js-tricks.html#using-foreach-sort-on-nodelists)

<!--more-->

## One-line async queue

Sometimes I want to run a number of functions in series, and don't want to get a fully fledged library like [async](https://github.com/caolan/async). We use this f.e. in Firefox OS test scripts to emulate sending keystrokes. This is easily done in a JavaScript one-liner.

{% highlight js %}
var cmds = [
  function(callback) { console.log('a'), setTimeout(callback, 1000); },
  function(callback) { console.log('b'), setTimeout(callback, 300); }
];

function queue(q, next) {
  q.length ? q.shift()(queue.bind(this, q, next)) : next();
}

queue(cmds, function() { console.log('done') });
{% endhighlight %}

If you're using a function that returns a promise (like `sendKey` in FxOS), you can use this function as well...

{% highlight js %}
var input = 'sometext'
var cmds = input.split('').map(function(char) {
  return function(next) {
    sendKey(char).then(next, next);
  };
});

queue(cmds, function() { console.log('done') });
{% endhighlight %}

## One-line event emitter

In a similar fashion, although I like writing evented code I don't feel like pulling in a full library like [EventEmitter2](https://github.com/asyncly/EventEmitter2). A neat little thing about JS in the browser is that every DOM element is already implementing [DOM Level 3 events](http://www.w3.org/TR/DOM-Level-3-Events/). So behold: a one line event emitter:

{% highlight js %}
function createEventEmitter() {
  return document.createElement('div');
}

var ee = createEventEmitter();
ee.addEventListener('awesome', function(e) {
  console.log('received awesome!', e.detail);
});
ee.dispatchEvent(new CustomEvent('awesome', { detail: 1337 }));
{% endhighlight %}

Downsides:

* It's about 5x times as slow as EventEmitter.js ([source](https://groups.google.com/d/msg/mozilla.dev.gaia/D4kRaSDspQI/OINSjliIu5oJ)), but you can very easily swap out this by EE if required in a later stage.
* Dispatching events is a bit cumbersome because you need to use this syntax: `new CustomEvent("eventname", { detail: "eventdetail" })`

## Function logger

Every now and then I'll get thrown into a codebase where I'm unfamiliar, and I want to get a grasp of how code flows. In the past I used [trace.gl](https://remysharp.com/2013/05/13/tracegl-for-javascript-debugging), but it has been discontinued, so I'm rather tracing the flow of code by hand. This simple logger logs the name of the function and the arguments being passed in.

{% highlight js %}
function log(args) {
  var STRIP_COMMENTS = /((\/\/.*$)|(\/\*[\s\S]*?\*\/))/mg;
  // stole this from http://stackoverflow.com/questions/1007981/how-to-get-function-parameter-names-values-dynamically-from-javascript
  function getParamNames(func) {
    var fnStr = func.toString().replace(STRIP_COMMENTS, '');
    var result = fnStr.slice(fnStr.indexOf('(')+1, fnStr.indexOf(')')).match(/([^\s,]+)/g);
    if(result === null)
       result = [];
    return result;
  }

  console.log(args.callee.name, getParamNames(args.callee).reduce(function(obj, k, ix) {
    obj[k] = args[ix];
    return obj;
  }, {}));
}
{% endhighlight %}

Now just put the following one-liner in every function you want to trace:

{% highlight js %}
function a(b, c) {
  log(arguments);
}

a(4, 5);
// a { b: 4, c: 5 }
{% endhighlight %}

Remember to disable "use strict" because accessing callee is not permitted anymore.

## Promisify'ing functions

I like promises, but not everyone has seen the light, so I run into code that does not utilize them yet. Nice thing is that it's easy to wrap node callbacks into promisified code without the need for an external library.

{% highlight js %}
function wrap(fn, that) {
  var self = this;
  return function() {
    var args = [].slice.call(arguments);
    return new Promise(function(res, rej) {
      args.push(function(err, result) {
        if (err) return rej(err);
        res(result);
      });
      fn.apply(that || self, args);
    });
  };
}

function oldStyleFn(name, callback) {
  setTimeout(function() {
    callback(null, 'Hello ' + name);
  }, 1000);
}

wrap(oldStyleFn)('Jan').then(function(msg) {
  console.log(msg);
});
{% endhighlight %}

You can set the `this` context inside the wrapped function, by passing the context as second parameter to the wrap function.

## Using .forEach(), .sort() on NodeList's

There's a ton of Array-like objects when dealing with the DOM, e.g. results from `querySelectorAll` or the `FileList` object. Even though the look like arrays, and have a length property, they are not proper arrays. That means functions like `forEach`, `map`, and `sort` are [not working on them](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/16020593/sorting-a-filelist-object/16020614#16020614). We can cast them into proper arrays with a simple function:

{% highlight js %}
var arr = [].slice.call(document.querySelectorAll('.div'));
typeof arr.forEach;
// function
{% endhighlight %}

From ES6 there'll also be [Array.from](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/from).

---

*Jan Jongboom is a Strategic Engineer for Telenor Digital, working on the Internet of Things. He's also a Google Developer Expert for web.*

<a href="https://twitter.com/janjongboom" class="twitter-follow-button" data-show-count="false" data-size="large">Follow @janjongboom</a>
<script>!function(d,s,id){var js,fjs=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0],p=/^http:/.test(d.location)?'http':'https';if(!d.getElementById(id)){js=d.createElement(s);js.id=id;js.src=p+'://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js';fjs.parentNode.insertBefore(js,fjs);}}(document, 'script', 'twitter-wjs');</script>
