---
layout: post
title:  "Compiling cwebp for Android with PNG/JPEG support"
date:   2015-01-20 17:46:00
categories: gonzo webp
author: "Jan Jongboom"
project: Gonzo
comments: false
---

> **TL;DR:** [Pre-configured git repo](https://github.com/comoyo/gonzo-libwebp/commit/b3a16d1bca338f787be998dd99e338d0fbb4496d). Clone it and run `ndk-build`.

In an earlier post I described that [power consumption]({{ site.baseurl }}/gonzo/hardware/2014/12/05/power-consumption.html) is our main issue with [Gonzo]({{ site.baseurl }}/about-gonzo/). We need the camera to run for a month or so on a single charge, and everything you do with the camera eats power away. A major cost in terms of battery life is uploading the photos that the camera takes. The photos that we take are 640x480, encoded as JPEG at 70% quality. That gives an average file size of a bit over 50 KB, and that takes 13 seconds to upload over a 2G connection. If we can get that down, that means less transmission time, and thus less power consumption.

There has been quite some fuss over new image formats that should compress better, of which [BPG](http://bellard.org/bpg/) looked very promising. Unfortunately it's built on top of x265, and licensing issues are withholding me from using it in any production system. Next thing: [WebP](https://developers.google.com/speed/webp/?csw=1), Googles image format based on VP8.

> Mozilla thought about better compression too, and created a separate project named [MozJPEG](https://github.com/mozilla/mozjpeg) that gets better results at encoding images than Firefox's default library libjpeg-turbo. Note that this won't replace the default JPEG library in Firefox, but is something especially for encoding images. However, when I was working on the issue MozJPEG 3 was not out yet, and I didn't look at how much improvement could be made over libjpeg-turbo.

As Gonzo is binary compatible with Android, and [libwebp](https://chromium.googlesource.com/webm/libwebp) ships with an Android.mk file, it was quite easy to compile the project through the Android NDK.

    $ ln -s $PWD $PWD/jni
    $ ndk-build

*As you can see I have no clue how to compile on Android without a /jni folder, so I just symlink to the current dir and all seems to be fine. Don't try this at home.*

This generates two ARM compatible binaries of cwebp and dwebp (encoder and decoder). Now when pushing the cwebp binary to Gonzo (through normal `adb push`) I could not encode any images:

    PNG support not compiled. Please install the libpng development package before building.

I asked a question about this on the [webp mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/webmproject.org/forum/#!topic/webp-discuss/LeykxPzUceA) but no ready answer was present. First thing I was wondering about was why the compiler did not complain about the lack of libpng and libjpeg, until I realized that in Android.mk the flags `-DWEBP_HAVE_PNG` and `-DWEBP_HAVE_JPEG` were missing. Adding the following line helps (delete obj/ directory first):

    WEBP_CFLAGS += -DWEBP_HAVE_PNG -DWEBP_HAVE_JPEG

And gives me a useful error message:

    jni/examples/jpegdec.c:21:21: fatal error: jpeglib.h: No such file or directory
    #include <jpeglib.h>

While I was doing this I didn't realize I could change Android.mk to compile libpng & libjpeg as static libraries and then use them later on from one file, as is done for the example_util library in [libwebp/examples/Android.mk](https://github.com/comoyo/gonzo-libwebp/blob/master/examples/Android.mk), so instead I:

* Added libjpeg, libpng and zlib to my source directory
* Added their .c files to the [LOCAL_FILES](https://github.com/comoyo/gonzo-libwebp/blob/b3a16d1bca338f787be998dd99e338d0fbb4496d/Android.mk#L101) in Android.mk (don't add everything, quite some files don't compile on Android)
* Made relative links to the header files instead of libraries (f.e.  [jpegdec.c](https://github.com/comoyo/gonzo-libwebp/blob/b3a16d1bca338f787be998dd99e338d0fbb4496d/examples/jpegdec.c#L21))

Now running `ndk-build` generates binaries that can also encode PNG and JPEG on Android. Victory!

It's also a victory for [Gonzo]({{ site.baseurl }}/about-gonzo/). We now encode images in WebP @ 60% and have acceptable image quality at 20-30 KB per photo. That shaves off half our transmission time (and adds 1 second for encoding) and saves us around 1,000 mAh in battery capacity!
